feat(wizard): initial design guidance (#30)
vmware-clarity/clarity-guidance: 1039-wizard-design-guidance.md

---
category: component design guidance
state: draft
created: 2024-10-17
updated: 2024-10-22
---

> # Wizard Component

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Wizard Design Guidance
```

> The [wizard](https://clarity.design/documentation/wizard) component guides the user through a set of predefined steps. Wizards can help users focus on only the input needed for each step and decrease the chance of errors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [wizard](https://clarity.design/documentation/wizard) component guides users through a series of predefined steps. Wizards help users concentrate on the necessary input for each step, reducing the likelihood of errors.
```

> A [Wizard](https://clarity.design/documentation/wizard) is a component that guides the user through a set of predefined steps. Wizards can help users focus on only the input needed for each step and decrease the chance of errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [wizard](https://clarity.design/documentation/wizard) component guides the user through a set of predefined steps. Wizards can help users focus on only the input needed for each step and decrease the chance of errors.
```

## Guidance

### Wizard Usage

> - **Must** have at least two steps in your wizard. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** have at least two steps in a wizard to provide a meaningful guided experience for users.
```

> - **Must** use a wizard to help users walk through a defined step-by-step process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **May** use a wizard to help users walk through a defined step-by-step process.
```

This is a "may" because the stepper is an option as well.

> - **Must not** have long or complex content in each step of the wizard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must not** include long or complex content in each step of the wizard, as this can overwhelm users and hinder their progress. Each step should be clear and concise.
```

> - **Must not** use a wizard with an additional modal as context will be lost. It also blocks accessibility for keyboard users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must not** use a wizard in conjunction with an additional modal, as this can lead to lost context and block accessibility for keyboard users. It’s important to maintain a clear and intuitive interface.
```

> - **Must** use a wizard when the content is self-sufficient (no need to access other parts of the app) since it blocks access to other parts of the application that are necessary for completing the process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Should** use a wizard when the content is self-sufficient (no need to access other parts of the app) since it blocks access to other parts of the application that are necessary for completing the process.
```

I think this one should be a "should" because it's not required to use a wizard when the content is self-sufficient. A stepper might be self-sufficient. That doesn't seem like a reason to *require* it to be changed to a wizard.

Author: Makes sense

> - **Must not** use a wizard when the user needs to leave mid-workflow and resume later.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must not** use a wizard when users need to leave mid-workflow and resume later, as this can disrupt their progress and lead to confusion. Instead, consider using a different structure that allows for saving progress.
```

> - **Must** NOT have long or complex content in each step of the Wizard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Must not** have long or complex content in each step of the wizard.
```

> - **Must** NOT use a wizard with an additional modal, as context will be lost. It also blocks accessibility for keyboard users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Must not** use a wizard with an additional modal as context will be lost. It also blocks accessibility for keyboard users.
```

> - **Should** use a wizard when the content is self-sufficient (no need to access other parts of the app) since it blocks access to other parts of the application that are necessary for completing the process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use a wizard when the content is self-sufficient and does not require access to other parts of the app, as wizards can block access to necessary areas for completing the process.
```

> - **May** use a wizard to help users walk through a defined step-by-step process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **may** use a wizard to guide users through a defined step-by-step process, helping to ensure clarity and improve user understanding.
```

> - **Must** NOT use a wizard when the user needs to leave halfway in-between the workflow and resume.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Must not** use a wizard when the user needs to leave halfway in-between the workflow and resume.
```

### Wizard Anatomy

> - The wizard title **must** describe the overall workflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** ensure the wizard title describes the overall workflow to provide users with clear context about the steps they are about to take.
```

> - The content title **must** be similar to its step title.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** ensure the content title is similar to its step title to maintain consistency and help users easily follow along with the workflow.
```

> - The content **must** be concise and provide a clear explanation of the task or information that the user should focus on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** ensure the content is concise and provides a clear explanation of the task or information that the user should focus on to avoid confusion and improve usability.
```
